And this lecture will be learning about composer composer is a dependency management program for PJ
Pete.
But what exactly does that mean.
As you can imagine if you're working on a large plugin or theme then there's a high possibility that
you're including third party libraries.
This can be anything from P2P libraries to see us as frameworks.
Previously you would have to download each library and include it yourself.
However with composer.
Everything is semi automated for you.
Another benefit to using composer is that it makes things standardized.
If you've ever downloaded a library then you probably had to mess around with the folder structure a
bit to make it fit with your project.
Composer automatically takes care of structuring and loading all your files so that you don't have to
type dozens of include and require functions.
Composer has gained a lot of popularity over the past few years because of how simple it is to use most
beginner developers tend to be intimidated by this program because you have to use the command line.
Hopefully you feel a little comfortable using the command line at this point.
Using composer isn't all that hard and once you understand the basics then you should be good to go
in the resource section of this lecture.
I provide a link to the official composer site.
Here you'll find information about composer and even download it.
Let's do that now.
If you're on a Windows machine then you're in luck.
There is an installer that you can download and we'll take care of setting up composer for you.
If you're on a Linux or Mac then you'll have to follow these instructions for setting up composer.
If you were to click on the Getting Started link then you'll find a more detailed guide.
I've already installed a composer using the installer file for Windows.
It's just a regular install.
There's nothing special you need to do if you run windows after installing composer.
You can then open the terminal something important.
I want to highlight is that you need to open a new terminal.
You can't have one open before or during the installation.
This is because the settings will only be applied to new instances of the terminal.
Right now I'm inside my editor.
I'm in a brand new folder called Web dash app.
Make sure your command line is pointed to this directory.
My editor automatically points to this directory.
If you don't have visual studio code then that's fine.
You can use the command line your operating system comes with.
Use the C D and unless commands to help you navigate to this folder when you install the composer you
were given a new command called composer input.
This command and press enter as you can see we get a list of some commands you can use with this command
and some additional information about this command.
The first sub command you'll usually use is in it.
Let's use that now run the command composer in it.
This will tell composer to create a composer Jason File this file will contain all your settings for
your project with composer.
This command helps you by creating this file and inputting all your settings without any error.
The first setting is the package name.
You'll notice that composer it tells you the format should be vendor's last name.
The vendor can be considered a user name.
When we start including third party packages you'll see it being formatted like this.
As you can see composer gives us a default value.
I'm not going to input anything which will tell composer to use its default name.
Next up is the description I'm going to leave this empty as well and continue on.
Then you'll be asked to input the author.
It says to input n to skip it so I'll do that the next setting is minimum stability.
This is asking us if the packages we plan on using are stable a package that is stable is considered
to be usable and error free non stable packages tend to have errors aren't maintained and outdated.
If you don't understand that's fine we'll leave this at the default.
We'll talk more about packages in just a moment.
I'm also going to skip the package type and license as I don't care to set them.
You'll then be asked if you would like to set up some package dependencies.
We'll do this in a moment but for now I'm going to input no for both.
You'll then be shown an example of what the file will look like.
It's pretty minimal which is good for now.
I'm going to say yes composer will now generate this file
open this file as you can see it's just a javascript object with properties that contain your settings.
You'll notice this one property called require.
This will contain a list of all packages that your project requires.
A package is the word composer uses to describe the files that you use like J query or bootstrap.
Right now we have no packages.
I'm going to input the following monologue slash monologue colon.
1 2 3 0
as you can see the package names are formatted as I told you earlier.
It starts with the name of the vendor a.k.a. the company or person who owns this package.
Then it's followed up with the name of the package itself.
After this you can specify the version.
This is one of the benefits of using composer.
You can specify a version with very little worry about downloading the wrong version.
There are a lot of formats for the version in the resource section of this lecture.
I provide a link to more information about the various formats for versions.
It gets complicated but if you're like me then you can just use the wildcard symbol the wild card tells
composer to just download the latest stable version.
Let's test this out to install the packages inside this file.
You need to run the command composer install
before I run this command.
I want to highlight that you must be in the same directory as this file if you inside a different directory
than your receive an error.
It may take a while for you as it's downloading files.
Just be patient.
All right.
So the package is finally finished downloading.
Composer will store all your packages inside a folder called vendor.
Let's look at what's inside this folder.
You'll see the package we wanted which was monologue.
You'll also see a couple more folders.
This may seem strange at first but it makes sense once you understand how packages work.
There's a folder named composer which is just composer's own settings.
You can safely ignore this folder.
Let's open the monologue folder.
There are a lot of files here but the one we care about is the composer Jason File.
Just like our project packages we install will have their own composer Dom Jason File.
A lot of this is unimportant to us.
Scroll down to where it defines its own dependencies which is this require property.
Some packages can specify their own dependencies.
This is the beauty of composer composer we'll take care of downloading and installing these packages
for you.
One of these is HP.
You can specify the minimum p p version for a package.
This is to help with compatibility issues.
All right.
So the other package it specifies is the PSR slash long package.
If you look inside the vendor folder again you'll see it downloaded here so you may be wondering where
do you even get these package names in the resource section of this lecture.
I provide a link to the site package ist package list is a site where users can submit their packages
to be downloaded and installed with composer any and all packages you want to install can be found here.
Let's search for the package monologue.
Click on the first result you find
on this page you'll find more information about this package.
You'll even see a list of required packages beforehand which is quite nice.
If you take a closer look you'll find a command you can use to download this package.
Let's try this out.
I'm going to delete my vendor folder.
Delete the composer dot LOC file and empty out the require object like so
then I'm going to run the command given which was composer require monologue slash monologue
after running this command.
We have monologue installed again.
Composer also took the time to update the composer Jason file with the require property set.
I mentioned the composer DOP LOC file earlier.
What this does is lock down the versions of the installed packages the lock file can make sure that
everyone works with the same package versions just because the application shouldn't break due to a
package update.
Doesn't mean that all your teammates and your production servers should all be running separate versions
when you first use composer to grab a dependency it writes the exact version to the lock file.
If you specified two dot three dot asterisk and two dot three dot five is the latest version than the
install version will be to dot 3.0 5 and it will be entered into the lock file.
You can of course decide to update your dependencies.
In this case you should run the command composer update.
This will grab the latest versions aloud and write them to the log file.
This will then be distributed to all sources.
All right so that doesn't for a composer.
There's a lot more features but we've learned everything we need to learn so far.
I highly encourage you to start using composer for your projects.
It'll help you manage files such as bootstrap J query and other p HP libraries.